We bemoan the injustice **of** being left **on** read. But perhaps missed connection is just a part **of** being a human **on** the internet. 

Any new technology created **for** the purpose **of** human connection also creates an opportunity **for** novel forms **of** *missed*  connection: the envelope returned **to** sender, the unanswered phone call, the forlorn voice mail. We replace face-**to**-face interaction **with** layers **of** mediation, each **with** its own chance **of** breakdown. The fear **of** losing touch is rooted **in** human nature; **in** eleventh-century Japan, women **of** the imperial court fretted **in** the hours **following** a tryst, as they waited **for** the customary morning-**after** poem **from** their lover. Proust wrote that the “silence **of** the person one loves” is “more cruel than the silence **of** prisons.” Social media, which was supposed **to** bring humanity closer together, has also created a smorgasbord **of** new ways **to** be rejected—D.M.s left **on** read, posts gone unliked, friends unfriended—that can engender the age-old fear **of** being ignored. Facebook users might recall a time when a declined friend request or unrequited poke could be sources **of** anxiety. But worse than blatant rejection is the absence **of** any signal, the total disappearance **of** the other party. This vanishing act, called “ghosting,” has become a persistent feature **of** twenty-first-century life. Dominic Pettman, a cultural theorist and professor **of** media **at** the New School, **in** New York City, examines this contemporary phenomenon **in** “Ghosting: **On** Disappearance,” a slim new monograph published this month **by** Polity. “Just as we inevitably invented the car crash when we invented automobiles, we also created ghosting when we created the internet,” Pettman writes. 

Ghosting most often describes an unexpected cliff appearing **along** the meandering path **of** dating life: one is suddenly abandoned **by** a prospective romantic partner. Conversation stops abruptly; texts or app messages go unanswered **without** excuse or explanation. Smartphones, always online, offer the possibility **of** 24/7 contact **with** a love interest, even if they are a relative stranger; the act **of** ghosting closes the channel **without** any recourse. Ghosters become unreachable phantoms; the ghostee may feel as though they’re facing none other than the impetuously grinning ghost emoji. But Pettman describes ghosting as an experience that transcends places **like** Hinge. “**At** a certain age, we have all been ghosted **at** some point **in** our lives. Indeed, we’ve all likely ghosted somebody **in** turn,” he writes. The author means this **in** the larger sense **of** abandonment—**of** a parent, **of** a friend, or even **of** a boss. We may aspire not **to** ghost, knowing the pain it causes, but technology has made ghosting, **in** its many forms, all but inevitable. 

The emergence **of** the term “ghosting” both identified a unique aspect **of** virtual life and established it as a trope. The more often people talk **about** ghosting, the more people seem **to** ghost. **In** the seventeenth century, Pettman writes, “ghosted” meant “died.” **In** the twentieth, it could refer **to** images blurring **on** television sets **owing **to faulty cables or **to** leaving the screen **on** too long. **In** the two-thousands, the phrase gained traction online **to** describe “suddenly ceasing **to** respond **to** someone **on** social media,” as the Oxford English Dictionary defined it, **in** 2021. Pettman’s book might best be read as comfort **for** the ghosted, **providing** a conceptual framework and a history **of** the idea. (You are not the first **to** be ghosted, and you won’t be the last.) But Pettman gets bogged **down** **in** his expanded definition as he analyzes the general theme **of** abandonment **in** chapters **on** romantic, familial, professional, and other sorts **of** relationships. Greta Garbo ghosted her fans when she left her acting career just as a restaurant that closes **without** warning ghosts its regulars. (Pettman riffs **on** “ghost kitchens,” the fly-**by**-night food-delivery operations that are supplanting real storefronts.) **According **to the author, modernity is a story **of** serial ghosting: Charles Darwin notified us that we had been ghosted **by** human nature, Nietzsche that we had been ghosted **by** God, Jean Baudrillard that we had been ghosted **by** reality, and Ronald Reagan that we had been ghosted **by** society. **In** this formulation, perhaps Donald Trump is the ghoster **of** democracy.

 There is a more specific phenomenology, yet **to** be charted, that exists solely **in** digital formats, where ghosting was, if not invented, perhaps perfected, allowing the ghoster **to** move **from** total accessibility **to** total inaccessibility **in** an instant. The internet has created an expectation **of** unabated interaction that did not exist **before**. “The digital medium is a medium **of**  *presence*,” the philosopher Byung-Chul Han wrote **in** his 2013 monograph “**In** the Swarm,” observing that the immediacy **of** digital communication created an illusion **of** instant connection that can be easily broken. **On** this token, disconnection is an illusion, too, because communication can just as quickly be restored if the other party wants it **to** be. Han has used centuries **of** philosophy **to** deconstruct the current ennui **of** life online, but Pettman’s writing is more personal and sympathetic than Han’s aphoristic, self-effacing mode. Pettman recalls an uncle **of** his who ghosted his family, fleeing Australia **for** the United Kingdom, as well as a potential employer who ghosted him **after** requesting his course plans, the job falling **through** **at** the last minute—memoiristic details that heighten the book’s critical insight: that such abandonment has always existed, but the internet has supercharged it. 

There is an unmistakable thirst **in** Pettman’s quest **to** understand the problems **of** having a body **in** an increasingly digital age. **In** his 2016 book, “Infinite Distraction,” he presciently observed that personalized social-media feeds were alienating users **from** each other **by** enclosing them **into** distinct and disconnected silos **of** content, the new information architecture “likely **to** turn us all **into** paranoiacs” because we never know what one another’s feeds look **like**. (We are paranoid **of** being ghosted, **of** discovering that there is nothing **behind** the avatars **of** our interlocutors.) **In** “Peak Libido,” **from** 2020, Pettman identified the “general fatigue” that follows the infinitely available stimulation **of** the internet and argued that “fleeting and fickle cravings” have replaced deeper and more productive interpersonal desire. That book came just as pandemic quarantine caused many people **to** double **down** **on** virtual interaction. Other people can always ghost. What will never ghost is an A.I. chatbot or the endless stream **of** content offered **by** digital platforms.

 Pettman notes that ghosting, rather than an intentional slight, is an inevitability: “We all look **down** **on** people who ghost. And yet we are all obliged **to** deploy this option **on** semi-regular occasions, **given** the **over**-connected world **in** which we live.” **Despite** its negative connotations, ghosting is necessary and can even be merciful, when compared **to** a prolonged fade or the slow drip **of** superficial digital interaction that some call “breadcrumbing.” Either we announce our disconnection **out** loud or we simply enact it, perhaps reinforcing the break **by** unmatching a suitor **on** a dating app or blocking a follower **on** social media. “Detaching is a necessary skill,” Pettman writes. If a connection is not amputated properly, one runs the risk **of** becoming another online archetype: the lurker, hanging **around** **in** the background **of** every screen. 

The postponed reply isn’t a new invention, but the jilted once had plausible excuses that could soothe their nerves. A letter returned **to** sender might be the result **of** a mistaken address; an unanswered voice mail might be the sign **of** a busy schedule. The online ghoster, however, is often caught **in** the act, their attention **to** the message signalled **by** a tiny checkmark showing they read it but did not write back. The ghosted feel omniscient but not omnipotent; technology has not yet invented a way **to** compel a response. That may be the true source **of** ghosting’s frustration: these days, we’re haunted **by** knowing too much.