**In** May, an unprecedented landslide destroyed an Alpine village. Scientists are studying the role **of** climate change, and residents are trying **to** rebuild. 

**In** mid-May, **at** **about** ten thousand feet **above** sea level, a rocky mountainside **in** the Swiss Alps gave way and tumbled onto a field **of** ice called the Birch Glacier. Half a mile **below**, **in** the Lötschen Valley, lay Blatten, a picturesque village **of** centuries-old wooden houses. The **following** night, Blatten’s mayor, Matthias Bellwald, heard crashing noises **from** the mountain. He quickly arranged **for** a helicopter **to** fly him and a local official who monitored natural hazards **up ** **to** the site. Although the mountain, the Kleine Nesthorn, was still covered **with** snow, they could tell that something deeply unnatural was happening. “I saw that, **on** the mountain, cracks had formed,” the Mayor told me. “**At** first, it was just one, then several more.”

 **Since** the nineties, the Birch Glacier, which covered an area **of** **about** fourteen city blocks, had been behaving strangely. **Unlike** many Alpine glaciers, which have receded as the planet warms, it had advanced **down** the slope, probably **because **of periodic rockfalls that weighed it **down**. As a result, Swiss authorities kept the section **under** constant surveillance. **On** Saturday, May 17th, **after** sensors detected more instability, the village government ordered the evacuation **of** what is known as the shadow side **of** the village, which is closest **to** the Kleine Nesthorn. Lukas Kalbermatten, the owner **of** a local hotel, told me that some village residents moved **from** their homes and **into** his property. 

Soon, a crack, which was perhaps several feet wide and a hundred feet deep, was spotted **between** the Kleine Nesthorn and the mountain range it was a part **of**—suggesting that the peak itself was unstable. “The whole mountain was moving,” Kalbermatten told me. **By** Monday morning, experts **from** the canton **of** Valais, which encompasses Blatten, estimated that up** **to**** three million cubic metres **of** debris could rush **down** the mountain, **over** a nearby dam, and **into** the village. This time, all **of** Blatten’s three hundred residents, **including** Kalbermatten, were required **to** leave **within** twenty minutes. Officials counted them individually as they left. 

**By** Monday evening, one flank **of** the Kleine Nesthorn had collapsed **in** **on** itself, sending more debris onto the glacier. Kalbermatten spent this period helping his employees find places **to** stay; he was optimistic that they’d be back **to** work soon. **On** May 28th, having little **to** do—his hotel was empty and inaccessible—he and a former colleague went **up to** an observation point just **across** the valley, where they’d have a good view **of** the glacier. **In** the hour and a half that Kalbermatten spent **up** there, rain started **to** fall. Then he saw the glacier and the mountainside begin **to** move. **In** a video that he shot, what looks **like** a wave **of** ice and stone slowly flows **down** **from** the snowy peak. A voice briefly cries **out** **with** shock, then falls silent. The slurry **of** glacier and debris picks **up** speed; **by** the time it reaches the treeline, farther **down** the slope, it has billowed **into** a cloud that resembles a volcanic eruption or an explosive demolition. **After** that, Kalbermatten stopped filming. He didn’t want **to** record the moment that his home town was erased. “We all knew,” he said. “It was too late.” 

A local farmer, Toni Rieder, witnessed the disaster **from** his car, **about** a mile **from** Blatten. “I heard the crash, the blast wave,” he told me. The wreckage **from** the village was thrown high **into** the air, he said; the energy **of** the landslide appeared **to** vaporize chunks **of** ice **into** a cloud **of** mist. One **of** his friends was tending **to** sheep nearby—**outside** the evacuation zone, but **inside** the area that was struck. “The first thing I knew was that he was gone,” Rieder said. “It was impossible **for** someone **to** survive.” 

The landslide contained an estimated nine million cubic metres **of** material—three **times** what officials had expected. It was so large that, **after** it reached the valley floor, it flowed **up** the opposite slope **before** sloshing back **down** again. The avalanche temporarily dammed the Lonza River, which runs **through** Blatten, and small lakes, filled **with** dead trees and detritus **from** homes, formed **on** each side **of** the village. **About** ninety **per** cent **of** Blatten, **including** Kalbermatten’s hotel, was destroyed. High **above** the village, the Birch Glacier was gone. 

The Lonza River is normally an icy blue, but when I first saw it, **on** a sunny day **in** June, it was brown **from** the debris upstream. I caught a bus **to** Blatten **from** the entrance **to** the Lötschen Valley, where the Lonza flows **into** the Rhône. We drove **up** a series **of** steep switchbacks **until** Alpine peaks, still decked **in** snow, towered **above** us. Then the bus rounded a corner and the landslide came **into** view. A man **in** the bus stood **up** and, **with** a shocked look **on** his face, took a photograph **with** his phone. **In** the distance, a brown gash stretched **from** the mountaintops **to** the valley floor. Where it had cut **through** forest, no trees remained intact; all had been flattened or buried. Blatten now resembled a pit mine. Several rivulets flowed lazily **through** the debris.

 I got **off** **in** Kippel, two villages **before** Blatten, and made my way **to** the town hall, which had become a staging area **for** the emergency response. Even **at** five thousand feet, the temperature was **in** the eighties. Upstairs, I met Mayor Bellwald, thin and tan **in** a red plaid shirt and hiking boots. He had occupied his position **for** only five months, and he looked drawn. **Like** everyone I interviewed **in** Blatten, he referred **to** the landslide as *die Katastrophe*. 

Bellwald told me that, **after** the landslide, the first thing he felt was pain. “An entire village—history, tradition, houses, memories—simply gone **in** thirty seconds,” he said. His deep-set eyes peered **at** me **through** large glasses. “Then, straightaway, came the feeling that I am responsible **for** this community. What needs **to** be done now?” **In** the days that followed, scientists studied the slope **to** gauge the risk **of** more landslides. The national government called **in** the Army **to** secure the area. First responders searched **for** the missing shepherd; his remains were not recovered **until** weeks later. Bellwald barely saw his family. He mentioned a recent conversation **with** his godmother, who is **in** her nineties and lost a seven-century-old house. “We can’t undo it,” she’d told him. “Just get **up** once more than you fall **down**.” 

Ultimately, hundreds **of** news outlets covered the destruction **of** Blatten. Experts called it unprecedented and warned that Alpine permafrost was thawing. **Before**-and-**after** photos went viral online. The media frenzy was so intense that, **at** one point, journalists were barred **from** entering the Kippel town hall. Meanwhile, Swiss newspapers debated whether Blatten should be abandoned. Beat Balzli, the editor-**in**-chief **of** the Sunday edition **of** the  *Neue Zürcher Zeitung*, cautioned politicians not to fall **into** an “empathy trap” by promising to rebuild. “The retreat **of** civilization reduces the potential for damage,” he wrote. “Where there is less, less is destroyed.” His argument was a version **of** one that Americans encounter every year, **whether after** hurricanes **in** Florida or **after** fires in Southern California.

