# How Long Will the Great Student Swap Last?

For years, public universities have aggressively recruited out-of-state and international students, charging them higher tuition. But those pipelines may be drying up.



hen prospective students visit the University of Alabama, they begin their tour at the Catherine and Pettus Randall Welcome Center, a gleaming white three-story Italianate-style structure with a stacked front porch. The building, which once housed a mental hospital and is on the National Register of Historic Places, opened up on campus in 2024. In the escalating contest for teen-age attention and allegiance, an admissions “welcome center”—with an auditorium for presentations to high-school students and their families and iconic spaces for Instagrammable moments—is now a must-have for universities. But Alabama’s might be the most extreme example.



Once inside, families are met with a mix between what one might find in a modern museum, and while waiting in line at Disney World to ride the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train. Floor-to-ceiling screens welcome visitors, displaying the individual names of prospective students in lights. As the visitors wend their way through the halls, toward the theatre where the admissions-information session takes place, they pass a series of carefully crafted photo and video exhibits highlighting various aspects of the university and the surrounding city of Tuscaloosa. The facility’s crown jewel is the Roll Tide Room, which is wrapped entirely in monitors playing clips from Alabama football games on a continuous loop.

The point of this is to persuade teen-agers from all over the country to choose Alabama. “You have to differentiate yourself at the front door,” Matt McLendon, who oversees the school’s undergraduate-enrollment operation, told me during a campus visit. “Not all undergraduates even here now were predisposed to consider us at first.”

For much of its history, Alabama, like other flagship institutions—that is, the best known public university in a given state—focussed on attracting students from within its own borders, competing in a ground game against nearby rivals, such as Auburn University. Over the past two decades, though, the University of Alabama has transformed its student body, increasing its share of new out-of-state undergraduates from just twenty-three per cent in 2002 to sixty-five per cent in 2022, according to recent data from the National Center for Education Statistics.

This trend is not confined to Alabama. The N.C.E.S also found that, in that same time span, the number of high-school graduates leaving their home state for a public university elsewhere has more than doubled. In 2002, about a quarter of the arriving undergraduates at the University of South Carolina came from outside the state; now roughly half of them do. In that same period, new out-of-state undergraduates at the University of Oregon increased from twenty-eight per cent to fifty-six per cent. At the University of Oklahoma, the number jumped from twenty-four per cent to forty-five per cent. The University of Wisconsin-Madison gradually raised its out-of-state enrollment cap and then totally eliminated it in 2015. Within six years, nearly half the first-year students on the Madison campus came from other states.

At the average flagship’s main campus, nearly four out of every ten undergraduates now come from another state. New Jersey kids go to Penn State instead of Rutgers; Illinois residents head off to the University of Missouri instead of the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. For students, going to college out of state is a chance to get away from home—and from their high-school classmates—or to experience what they perceive as “big college” life, such as Saturday tailgates and a thriving social scene centered on fraternities and sororities. But it’s the schools themselves that benefit most from this system, as they are able to charge much higher tuition for out-of-state students. Total costs for in-state students at Alabama run $34,600 this academic year; for out-of-state students, the list price is nearing sixty thousand dollars. Though the quality of the school’s football program cannot be denied, many of these students are coming from states such as Illinois, Georgia, and California, which are also known for big universities with prominent football teams, school spirit, and a vibrant Greek life. (Not to mention that at any big public university, you are still likely to encounter tens of thousands of new people who have never even heard of your high school, even if it’s in the same state.) In other words, these students are paying twice as much as they would otherwise—for a similar product.

This game in which states essentially trade students, [dubbed by researchers](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-great-student-swap/) as the Great Student Swap, dates back to the two recessions that rocked the U.S. economy in the first decade of this millennium. Each time, state budgets took a big hit, and lawmakers looked to higher education to help close their deficits. Some states slashed existing spending on their universities while others held back new investments. As universities received less and less from state coffers, they had just one way to make up for lost dollars: charging students more.

In 2003 and 2004, college students who attended public universities in their home states typically paid about a third of the cost of their education. Schools increased tuition for those kids—by 2012, in-state students were paying for almost half their education, on average—but administrators didn’t want to go too far and provoke the ire of lawmakers who’d hear about it from their constituents. And, anyway, they could raise a lot more money much faster by recruiting out-of-state and international students, typically charging them twice the in-state rate, even if the in-state rate was already inflated.

The conditions were almost ideal for flagships to ride a wave of out-of-state students starting in the early two-thousands. High-school-graduation numbers spiked, but élite private colleges didn’t expand their incoming classes to meet the increase in demand. So students who were closed out of top-ranked private colleges added big flagships in other states to their lists of options. Those colleges were more than willing to accommodate out-of-staters and their fatter tuition checks by expanding their freshman classes or by rejecting in-state applicants they deemed less qualified.



Out-of-state flagships became even more attractive after the Great Recession of 2008, as families with financial means started to question the value of paying full freight at more obscure private colleges. In contrast to a private school like Scripps, Skidmore, Chapman, or Clark, a flagship—even if it meant moving states—seemed like a relative bargain. Sure, these families had to pay out-of-state tuition. But a price tag of, say, thirty thousand dollars a year at the University of Minnesota looked pretty reasonable compared with the fifty thousand or so that a private school such as the College of the Holy Cross in Massachusetts expected them to pay annually.



In some cases, high-school seniors were actively pushed to apply to out-of-state universities. Although most public universities expanded to take in more students from elsewhere, while still being able to cater to a sizable in-state student population, not all did. According to a study from 2017, a third of the nation’s flagships—all highly ranked and thus popular with out-of-staters—turned away some of their own state’s residents to make room for higher-paying students from elsewhere. For every two non-resident students who enrolled, the study found, one in-state student was shut out. That vicious cycle spins in states such as California, Illinois, and Texas. Residents apply to their local flagship. They get crowded out, and so they go to big public universities in other states which have space for them. Then students in *those* states get pushed aside, so they apply to public universities in other states, too.

In other cases, strong applicants were pulled across state lines by a hefty discount or a boutique academic experience, such as an honors college. One prospective student I met from Pennsylvania had initially set her sights on the University of Chicago. Despite her near-perfect stats (a 35 on the ACT, a 1510 on the SAT, thirteen Advanced Placement courses, and a 3.95 grade-point average), she was rejected after applying early decision. At the time, she didn’t have a single public university on her shortlist. Her mother did some digging and landed on the University of Mississippi as a possibility. It has an honors college and generous scholarships, including some that come with stipends for study-abroad programs and undergraduate research. “I applied to appease my mom and get an acceptance under my belt,” she told me.

It wasn’t until after she was accepted and had started the interview process for the university’s top scholarships that she seriously considered going there. She realized, “There were all these opportunities I could qualify for, and I was hearing about them before I heard I was even accepted to other schools.” Mississippi knew it was competing with much higher-ranked colleges, so it had to come in strong and early.

By April, the student had acceptance letters and financial-aid packages from Rice and Vanderbilt. Neither included the full ride and other perks that Mississippi offered her. Before making her decision, she flew to Houston with her dad to visit Rice again. It was a weekday, but the campus felt dead. They walked to a nearby park, where she made a pros-and-cons list for Rice and Mississippi. Then she broke down in tears.“The only pro I could come up with for Rice,” she recalled when we spoke recently, “is that people will know I’m smart because I go to Rice.”

With more tuition dollars coming in from out-of-state students, public universities such as Ole Miss could afford to offer discounts or even full rides to a select number of academic superstars. The University of Alabama, for example, spent $185.4 million on merit aid in 2023-24, more than twice what it allocated for need-based aid. These high-achieving students act as magnets, attracting others in their home towns who don’t mind paying an out-of-state sticker price that, to them, still seems like a steal.

When Alabama started going after out-of-staters, it focussed on two types of places, according to a team of social scientists who studied how colleges recruit. It targeted high schools in prosperous suburbs around Atlanta, Dallas, Houston, Miami, and Los Angeles, where the university knew that getting accepted to in-state flagships was very difficult for all but the top students. It also courted applicants from bedroom communities around New York; Washington, D.C.; Seattle; Boston; and eventually Chicago, where Alabama’s sticker price looked downright reasonable compared with the tuition at pricey private colleges and more expensive public options. Over time, these efforts paid off. By 2022, Georgia, Illinois, Florida, Texas, and California ranked among Alabama’s top sources of out-of-staters.

When the big public universities first went on their out-of-state recruiting spree more than twenty years ago, they had an abundance of prospective students to choose from among millennials. Then, over the past ten years, they also saw a steady increase in interest from overseas, as the number of international students enrolling in U.S. institutions grew by twenty-seven per cent, amounting to more than a million international students attending school in the U.S.

And yet those pipelines may be drying up. The class of freshmen arriving on college campuses this fall may be the last big one for years, owing in part to declining birth rates and fewer high-school graduates deciding to attend college. What’s more, the decline is not evenly distributed across the country. Only the South will see a net increase in high-school graduates, and that’s the region where out-of-state enrollment has swelled the most among public flagships. For those universities, the supply of students from elsewhere may begin to dwindle.

At the same time, the Trump Administration is making it harder for international students to come to the U.S.; visa delays and new requirements to review international students’ social-media accounts are projected to reduce this year’s international arrivals by at least thirty per cent. Tom Dretler, the chief executive of Shorelight, which helps colleges with overseas recruitment, told me that the over-all figure hides wide variations by institution. How many different countries do they recruit from? And where exactly are they on higher ed’s ladder of prestige? Campuses drawing students mostly from India, one of the largest suppliers, are the most vulnerable. “If you’re a public university that’s relatively affordable, you’ll do well,” he said. “If you’re expensive but not élite, it’s a struggle. Five years ago, being in the top hundred was enough. Now it isn’t.”

At the University of California, San Diego, where international students and out-of-staters account for roughly eighteen per cent of undergraduates, the university has tried to prepare for a drop-off in international enrollment by recruiting even more domestic students from outside California. When I spoke to the school’s chancellor, Pradeep Khosla, just two weeks before the start of classes, he was still unsure exactly how many international students would show up. “The indicators are more positive now,” he told me, compared with the outlook in the spring. And yet the type of international student accepted to San Diego also has options in other countries, Khosla said. “The question is whether families will still send their kids to the U.S.” 